I could watch Amr Sabana and Ramy Ashour all day, but for different reasons.  Both exhibt flowing movement around the court, tactical awareness and incredible control of the ball.
However, when it comes to technique and swing, they are very different.
Don't worry though, I'm not going to write a detailed analysis of their different swing mechanics, no, in this essay I want to talk about how we teach technique to children and adult beginners.

Schools, teachers and education systems in general are often accussed of trying to remove individuality from students and create some sort of production line; churning out "standard" students all with the the same level of knowledge and abilities.  There's clearly a certain amount of truth in that because we don't have one teacher for each student, so we have to standardize some things.

When it comes to coaching technique, we use a similar concept.  We know that there are acceptable variations within a swing, timing and contact, but we also know that for MOST players, young and old, there is a better chance of hitting the ball well if we conform to a standard swing mecahnics.

What that means is that I, as a coach, will try to get students to swing more like Mr. Shabana than Mr. Ashour.  That's not to say that Mr. Ashours swing is so unconventional that only he could have it, but more on that soon. I try to avoid letting each player develop their own swing style, as the chances of each one developing a different swing that allows them to hit the ball with control and power is small, but does that mean I should "force" all my pupils to "conform" to a standard swing?  No, but I should perhaps encourage them to use a swing that I know will work for most people and has solid biomechanical research behind it.

99.9% of pupils will never reach an elite level or even reach their potential and that's fine.  My goal as a coach is not to take one thousand players and create one world class player with 999 players who can't player well.  My goal is to take one thousand players and make as many of them as proficient as possible.  If that means they all have a similar style, I am happy with that.

Why can't you have both, 1 elite player AND 999 proficient players?  You can and that's where the "Art" of coaching goes beyond the science.  An experienced coach can spot the player that needs more freedom with their swing and mechanics.  They can also identify the players that need a framework of restrictions, to get the best out of themselves.  But that must be tempered with the almost unlimited enthusiasm of younger players who see one Rafa Nadal, Lionel Messi and Ramy Ashour and believe that they too can reach those heights, and of course, they can't, not all of them anyway.

Let's talk about Mr. Federer for a moment.  In head-to-head battles with Mr. Nadal, Rafa leads 24 to 16, but of course there's more nuance to it that, it depends on the surface and other factors, and if you are interested, you can find all the details on a wikipedia page, which is linked to at the end of this essay.  So what's my point with this?  Who would I rather have my tennis pupils play like, Federer (with the losing record) or Nadal (with the winning record)?  I answer, Federer!  Why? Because his technique is better for "most" players, more classic.  If you took 100 players and taught them Federer's technique and 100 players and taught them Nadal's technique, and then somehow compared the average standard, I believe that the Federer group would be higher.  I am less certain which group would produce the "best" player.

Back to Mr. Ashour.  No, I am NOT directly comparing him to Mr. Nadal in the sense that Mr. Nadal's technique has been said to have had an influence on his long term health and fitness; his swing movement is not conducive to staying injury free, but when it is working , it is devastating.  What I am saying is that Mr. Ashour is an artist beyond compare and it may be a while until we see somebody with his abilities, but is his technique and style right for everyone?  No, but neither is Mr. Shabana's.  It's just likely to be more successful for more people.

If you are a club player and with regard to swing technique, I would highly recommend watching, and even copying, Amr Shabana or Fares Dessouky.  The chances are whatever you current swing style, standard or ambition, their technique can be imitated and you are likely to see improvement.  As far as imitating mr. Ashour, sure, go ahead and try, and if it works for you, that's great, but don't get too disappointed with yourself if you can't make it work.  His less confirmed wrist preparation is not suitable for everybody.  One last thing, there is a deeper connection bewteen technique and the player's mental approach than is generally acknowldeged.

If you are a coach, then I would love to hear your thougths on teaching technique to children and beginner adults.  Should we prescribe a restrictive swing mechanic that will almost certainly be successful or let them develop their own style, which whilst possibly not offering the confidence of success may allow them to become even better than we hoped?



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federer%E2%80%93Nadal_rivalry